This concise Synthesis Report (SYR) Glossary defines selected key
terms used in this report, drawn from the glossaries of the three
Working Group contributions to the AR6. A more comprehensive,
harmonised set of definitions for terms used in this SYR and the
three AR6 Working Group reports is available from the IPCC
Online Glossary: https://apps.ipcc.ch/glossary/
Readers are requested to refer to this comprehensive online
glossary for definitions of terms of a more technical nature, and
for scientific references relevant to individual terms. Italicized
words indicate that the term is defined in this or/and the online
glossary. Subterms appear in italics beneath main terms.
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
A UN resolution in September 2015 aadopting a plan of action for
people, planet and prosperity in a new global development framework
anchored in 17 Sustainable Development Goals.
Abrupt climate change
A large-scale abrupt change in the climate system that takes place over
a few decades or less, persists (or is anticipated to persist) for at least
a few decades and causes substantial impacts in human and/or natural
systems. See also: Abrupt change, Tipping point.
Adaptation
In human systems, the process of adjustment to actual or expected
climate and its effects, in order to moderate harm or exploit beneficial
opportunities. In natural systems, the process of adjustment to actual
climate and its effects; human intervention may facilitate adjustment
to expected climate and its effects. See also: Adaptation options,
Adaptive capacity, Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptation gap
The difference between actually implemented adaptation and a
societally set goal, determined largely by preferences related to
tolerated climate change impacts and reflecting resource limitations
and competing priorities.
Annexes
Adaptation limits
The point at which an actor’s objectives (or system needs) cannot be
secured from intolerable risks through adaptive actions.
• Hard adaptation limit - No adaptive actions are possible to
avoid intolerable risks.
• Soft adaptation limit - Options may exist but are currently
not available to avoid intolerable risks through adaptive
action.
Transformational adaptation
Adaptation that changes the fundamental attributes of a
social-ecological system in anticipation of climate change and
its impacts.
120
Aerosol
A suspension of airborne solid or liquid particles, with typical particle
size in the range of a few nanometres to several tens of micrometres
and atmospheric lifetimes of up to several days in the troposphere
and up to years in the stratosphere. The term aerosol, which includes
both the particles and the suspending gas, is often used in this report
in its plural form to mean ‘aerosol particles’. Aerosols may be of either
natural or anthropogenic origin in the troposphere; stratospheric
aerosols mostly stem from volcanic eruptions. Aerosols can cause an
effective radiative forcing directly through scattering and absorbing
radiation (aerosol–radiation interaction), and indirectly by acting as
cloud condensation nuclei or ice nucleating particles that affect the
properties of clouds (aerosol–cloud interaction), and upon deposition
on snow- or ice-covered surfaces. Atmospheric aerosols may be either
emitted as primary particulate matter or formed within the atmosphere
from gaseous precursors (secondary production). Aerosols may be
composed of sea salt, organic carbon, black carbon (BC), mineral
species (mainly desert dust), sulphate, nitrate and ammonium or
their mixtures. See also: Particulate matter (PM), Aerosol–radiation
interaction, Short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs).
Afforestation
Conversion to forest of land that historically has not contained forests.
See also: Anthropogenic removals, Carbon dioxide removal (CDR),
Deforestation, Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation (REDD+), Reforestation.
[Note: For a discussion of the term forest and related terms such as
afforestation, reforestation and deforestation, see the 2006 IPCC
Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and their
2019 Refinement, and information provided by the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change]
Agricultural drought
See: Drought.
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU)
In the context of national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories under
the United Nations Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
AFOLU is the sum of the GHG inventory sectors Agriculture and
Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF); see the 2006
IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories for details. Given the
difference in estimating the ‘anthropogenic’ carbon dioxide (CO2)
removals between countries and the global modelling community, the
land-related net GHG emissions from global models included in this
report are not necessarily directly comparable with LULUCF estimates
in national GHG Inventories. See also: Land use, land-use change and
forestry (LULUCF), Land-use change (LUC).
Agroforestry
Collective name for land-use systems and technologies where woody
perennials (trees, shrubs, palms, bamboos, etc.) are deliberately used
on the same land-management units as agricultural crops and/or
animals, in some form of spatial arrangement or temporal sequence.
In agroforestry systems there are both ecological and economical
interactions between the different components. Agroforestry can
also be defined as a dynamic, ecologically based, natural resource
management system that, through the integration of trees on farms

and in the agricultural landscape, diversifies and sustains production for
increased social, economic and environmental benefits for land users at
all levels.
Anthropogenic
Resulting from or produced by human activities.
Behavioural change
In this report, behavioural change refers to alteration of human
decisions and actions in ways that mitigate climate change and/or
reduce negative consequences of climate change impacts.
Biodiversity
Biodiversity or biological diversity means the variability among living
organisms from all sources including, among other things, terrestrial,
marine and other aquatic ecosystems, and the ecological complexes
of which they are part; this includes diversity within species, between
species and of ecosystems. See also: Ecosystem, Ecosystem services.
Bioenergy
Energy derived from any form of biomass or its metabolic by-products.
See also: Biofuel.
Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage (BECCS)
Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) technology applied to
a bioenergy facility. Note that, depending on the total emissions
of the BECCS supply chain, carbon dioxide (CO 2) can be removed
from the atmosphere. See also: Anthropogenic removals,
Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS), Carbon dioxide removal (CDR).
Blue infrastructure
See: Infrastructure.
Carbon budget
Refers to two concepts in the literature:
(1) an assessment of carbon cycle sources and sinks on a global level,
through the synthesis of evidence for fossil fuel and cement emissions,
emissions and removals associated with land use and land-use change,
ocean and natural land sources and sinks of carbon dioxide (CO2),
and the resulting change in atmospheric CO2 concentration. This is
referred to as the Global Carbon Budget; (2) the maximum amount of
cumulative net global anthropogenic CO2 emissions that would result in
limiting global warming to a given level with a given probability, taking
[Note 1: Net anthropogenic CO 2 emissions are anthropogenic
CO2 emissions minus anthropogenic CO 2 removals. See also:
Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR).
Note 2: The maximum amount of cumulative net global anthropogenic
CO2 emissions is reached at the time that annual net anthropogenic
CO2 emissions reach zero.
Note 3: The degree to which anthropogenic climate forcers other than
CO2 affect the total carbon budget and remaining carbon budget
depends on human choices about the extent to which these forcers are
mitigated and their resulting climate effects.
Note 4: The notions of a total carbon budget and remaining carbon
budget are also being applied in parts of the scientific literature
and by some entities at regional, national, or sub-national level. The
distribution of global budgets across individual different entities and
emitters depends strongly on considerations of equity and other value
judgements.]
Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS)
A process in which a relatively pure stream of carbon dioxide (CO2)
from industrial and energy-related sources is separated (captured),
conditioned, compressed and transported to a storage location for
long-term isolation from the atmosphere. Sometimes referred to as
Carbon Capture and Storage. See also: Anthropogenic removals,
Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage (BECCS),
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU), Carbon dioxide removal (CDR),
Sequestration.
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR)
Anthropogenic activities removing carbon dioxide (CO2) from the
atmosphere and durably storing it in geological, terrestrial, or
ocean reservoirs, or in products. It includes existing and potential
anthropogenic enhancement of biological or geochemical CO2 sinks
and direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage (DACCS) but excludes
natural CO 2 uptake not directly caused by human activities.
See also: Afforestation, Anthropogenic removals, Biochar, Bioenergy
with carbon dioxide capture and storage (BECCS), Carbon dioxide
capture and storage (CCS), Enhanced weathering, Ocean alkalinization/
Ocean alkalinity enhancement, Reforestation, Soil carbon sequestration (SCS).
Cascading impacts
Cascading impacts from extreme weather/climate events occur when
an extreme hazard generates a sequence of secondary events in natural
and human systems that result in physical, natural, social or economic
disruption, whereby the resulting impact is significantly larger than the
initial impact. Cascading impacts are complex and multi-dimensional,
and are associated more with the magnitude of vulnerability than with
that of the hazard.
Climate
In a narrow sense, climate is usually defined as the average weather
-or more rigorously, as the statistical description in terms of the mean
and variability of relevant quantities- over a period of time ranging
from months to thousands or millions of years. The classical period
for averaging these variables is 30 years, as defined by the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO). The relevant quantities are most
often surface variables such as temperature, precipitation and wind.
Climate in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical description,
of the climate system.
Climate change
A change in the state of the climate that can be identified (e.g., by using
statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability of its
properties and that persists for an extended period, typically decades
or longer. Climate change may be due to natural internal processes
or external forcings such as modulations of the solar cycles, volcanic
eruptions and persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition of
the atmosphere or in land use. See also: Climate variability, Detection
and attribution, Global warming, Natural (climate) variability, Ocean
acidification (OA).
[Note that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC), in its Article 1, defines climate change as: ‘a change
of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity
that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in
addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable time
periods’. The UNFCCC thus makes a distinction between climate change
attributable to human activities altering the atmospheric composition
and climate variability attributable to natural causes.]
Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate event)
The occurrence of a value of a weather or climate variable above
(or below) a threshold value near the upper (or lower) ends of the range
of observed values of the variable. By definition, the characteristics of
what is called extreme weather may vary from place to place in an
absolute sense. When a pattern of extreme weather persists for some
time, such as a season, it may be classified as an extreme climate event,
especially if it yields an average or total that is itself extreme (e.g., high
temperature, drought, or heavy rainfall over a season). For simplicity,
both extreme weather events and extreme climate events are referred
to collectively as ‘climate extremes’.
Annexes
Climate finance
There is no agreed definition of climate finance. The term ‘climate
finance’ is applied to the financial resources devoted to addressing
climate change by all public and private actors from global to local
scales, including international financial flows to developing countries
to assist them in addressing climate change. Climate finance aims to
reduce net greenhouse gas emissions and/or to enhance adaptation
and increase resilience to the impacts of current and projected climate
change. Finance can come from private and public sources, channelled
by various intermediaries, and is delivered by a range of instruments,
including grants, concessional and non-concessional debt, and internal
budget reallocations.
Climate governance
The structures, processes, and actions through which private and public
actors seek to mitigate and adapt to climate change.
Climate justice
See: Justice.
122
Climate literacy
Climate literacy encompasses being aware of climate change, its
anthropogenic causes, and implications.
Climate resilient development (CRD)
Climate-resilient development refers to the process of implementing
greenhouse gas mitigation and adaptation measures to support
sustainable development for all.
Climate sensitivity
The change in the surface temperature in response to a change in the
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration or other radiative
forcing. See also: Climate feedback parameter.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS)
The equilibrium (steady state) change in the surface temperature
following a doubling of the atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2)
concentration from pre-industrial conditions.
Climate services
Climate services involve the provision of climate information in such
a way as to assist decision-making. The service includes appropriate
engagement from users and providers, is based on scientifically credible
information and expertise, has an effective access mechanism, and
responds to user needs.
Climate system
The global system consisting of five major components: the atmosphere,
the hydrosphere, the cryosphere, the lithosphere and the biosphere,
and the interactions between them. The climate system changes in
time under the influence of its own internal dynamics and because of
external forcings such as volcanic eruptions, solar variations, orbital
forcing, and anthropogenic forcings such as the changing composition
of the atmosphere and land-use change.
Climatic impact-driver (CID)
Physical climate system conditions (e.g., means, events, extremes)
that affect an element of society or ecosystems. Depending on system
tolerance, CIDs and their changes can be detrimental, beneficial, neutral
or a mixture of each across interacting system elements and regions.
See also: Hazard, Impacts, Risk.
CO2-equivalent emission (CO2-eq)
The amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) emission that would have an
equivalent effect on a specified key measure of climate change, over
a specified time horizon, as an emitted amount of another greenhouse
gas (GHG) or a mixture of other GHGs. For a mix of GHGs it is obtained
by summing the CO2-equivalent emissions of each gas. There are
various ways and time horizons to compute such equivalent emissions
(see greenhouse gas emission metric). CO2-equivalent emissions are
commonly used to compare emissions of different GHGs but should not
be taken to imply that these emissions have an equivalent effect across
all key measures of climate change.
[Note: Under the Paris Rulebook [Decision 18/CMA.1, annex, paragraph
37], parties have agreed to use GWP100 values from the IPCC AR5 or
GWP100 values from a subsequent IPCC Assessment Report to report
aggregate emissions and removals of GHGs. In addition, parties may
use other metrics to report supplemental information on aggregate
emissions and removals of GHGs.]
Compound weather/climate events
The terms ‘compound events’, ‘compound extremes’ and ‘compound
extreme events’ are used interchangeably in the literature and this
report, and refer to the combination of multiple drivers and/or hazards
that contribute to societal and/or environmental risk.
Deforestation
Conversion of forest to non-forest. See also: Afforestation,
Reforestation, Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation (REDD+).
[Note: For a discussion of the term forest and related terms such
as afforestation, reforestation and deforestation, see the 2006
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and their
2019 Refinement, and information provided by the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change]
Demand-side measures
Policies and programmes for influencing the demand for goods and/ or
services. In the energy sector, demand-side mitigation measures aim at
reducing the amount of greenhouse gas emissions emitted per unit of
energy service used.
Development pathways
See: Pathways.
Disaster risk management (DRM)
Processes for designing, implementing and evaluating strategies,
policies and measures to improve the understanding of current and
future disaster risk, foster disaster risk reduction and transfer, and
promote continuous improvement in disaster preparedness, prevention
and protection, response and recovery practices, with the explicit
purpose of increasing human security, well-being, quality of life and
sustainable development (SD).
Drought
An exceptional period of water shortage for existing ecosystems and the
human population (due to low rainfall, high temperature and/or wind).
See also: Plant evaporative stress.
Agricultural and ecological drought
Depending on the affected biome: a period with abnormal
soil moisture deficit, which results from combined shortage of
precipitation and excess evapotranspiration, and during the growing
season impinges on crop production or ecosystem function in
general.
Early warning systems (EWS)
The set of technical and institutional capacities to forecast, predict, and
communicate timely and meaningful warning information to enable
individuals, communities, managed ecosystems, and organisations
threatened by a hazard to prepare to act promptly and appropriately
to reduce the possibility of harm or loss. Depending upon context, EWS
may draw upon scientific and/or Indigenous knowledge, and other
knowledge types. EWS are also considered for ecological applications,
e.g., conservation, where the organisation itself is not threatened by
hazard but the ecosystem under conservation is (e.g., coral bleaching alerts),
in agriculture (e.g., warnings of heavy rainfall, drought, ground frost,
and hailstorms) and in fisheries (e.g., warnings of storm, storm surge,
and tsunamis).
Ecological drought
See: Drought.
Ecosystem
An ecosystem is a functional unit consisting of living organisms,
their nonliving environment and the interactions within and between
them. The components included in a given ecosystem and its spatial
boundaries depend on the purpose for which the ecosystem is defined:
in some cases, they are relatively sharp, while in others they are diffuse.
Ecosystem boundaries can change over time. Ecosystems are nested
within other ecosystems and their scale can range from very small to
the entire biosphere. In the current era, most ecosystems either contain
people as key organisms, or are influenced by the effects of human
activities in their environment. See also: Ecosystem health, Ecosystem
services.
Ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA)
The use of ecosystem management activities to increase the
resilience and reduce the vulnerability of people and ecosystems to
climate change. See also: Adaptation, Nature-based solution (NbS).
Ecosystem services
Ecological processes or functions having monetary or non-monetary
value to individuals or society at large. These are frequently classified as
(1) supporting services such as productivity or biodiversity maintenance,
(2) provisioning services such as food or fibre, (3) regulating services
such as climate regulation or carbon sequestration, and (4) cultural
123
Annexes
Developed / developing countries (Industrialissed / developed /
developing countries)
There is a diversity of approaches for categorizing countries on the
basis of their level of development, and for defining terms such as
industrialised, developed, or developing. Several categorisations
are used in this report. (1) In the United Nations (UN) system, there
is no established convention for the designation of developed and
developing countries or areas. (2) The UN Statistics Division specifies
developed and developing regions based on common practice. In
addition, specific countries are designated as least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries, Small Island Developing States (SIDS),
and transition economies. Many countries appear in more than one of
these categories. (3) The World Bank uses income as the main criterion
for classifying countries as low, lower middle, upper middle, and high
income. (4) The UN Development Programme (UNDP) aggregates
indicators for life expectancy, educational attainment, and income
into a single composite Human Development Index (HDI) to classify
countries as low, medium, high, or very high human development.

services such as tourism or spiritual and aesthetic appreciation.
See also: Ecosystem, Ecosystem health, Nature’s contributions to
people (NCP).
Emission scenario
See: Scenario.
Emission pathways
See: Pathways.
Enabling conditions (for adaptation and mitigation options)
Conditions that enhance the feasibility of adaptation and mitigation
options. Enabling conditions include finance, technological innovation,
strengthening policy instruments, institutional capacity, multi-level
governance, and changes in human behaviour and lifestyles.
Equality
A principle that ascribes equal worth to all human beings, including
equal opportunities, rights and obligations, irrespective of origins.
See also: Equity, Fairness.
Inequality
Uneven opportunities and social positions, and processes of
discrimination within a group or society, based on gender,
class, ethnicity, age, and (dis)ability, often produced by uneven
development. Income inequality refers to gaps between highest and
lowest income earners within a country and between countries.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS)
See: Climate sensitivity.
Equity
The principle of being fair and impartial, and a basis for understanding
how the impacts and responses to climate change, including costs and
benefits, are distributed in and by society in more or less equal ways.
Often aligned with ideas of equality, fairness and justice and applied
with respect to equity in the responsibility for, and distribution of,
climate impacts and policies across society, generations, and gender,
and in the sense of who participates and controls the processes of
decision-making.
Annexes
Exposure
The presence of people; livelihoods; species or ecosystems; environmental
functions, services, and resources; infrastructure; or economic, social, or
cultural assets in places and settings that could be adversely affected.
See also: Hazard, Exposure, Vulnerability, Impacts, Risk.
Feasibility
In this report, feasibility refers to the potential for a mitigation or
adaptation option to be implemented. Factors influencing feasibility
are context-dependent, temporally dynamic, and may vary between
different groups and actors. Feasibility depends on geophysical,
environmental-ecological, technological, economic, socio-cultural and
institutional factors that enable or constrain the implementation of an
option. The feasibility of options may change when different options
are combined and increase when enabling conditions are strengthened.
See also: Enabling conditions (for adaptation and mitigation options).
124
Fire weather
Weather conditions conducive to triggering and sustaining wildfires,
usually based on a set of indicators and combinations of indicators
including temperature, soil moisture, humidity, and wind. Fire weather
does not include the presence or absence of fuel load.
Food loss and waste
The decrease in quantity or quality of food. Food waste is part of food
loss and refers to discarding or alternative (non-food) use of food that
is safe and nutritious for human consumption along the entire food
supply chain, from primary production to end household consumer
level. Food waste is recognized as a distinct part of food loss because
the drivers that generate it and the solutions to it are different from
those of food losses.
Food security
A situation that exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social
and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets
their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.
The four pillars of food security are availability, access, utilization and
stability. The nutritional dimension is integral to the concept of food
security.
Global warming
Global warming refers to the increase in global surface temperature
relative to a baseline reference period, averaging over a period
sufficient to remove interannual variations (e.g., 20 or 30 years). A
common choice for the baseline is 1850–1900 (the earliest period
of reliable observations with sufficient geographic coverage), with
more modern baselines used depending upon the application.
See also: Climate change, Climate variability, Natural (climate)
variability.
Global warming potential (GWP)
An index measuring the radiative forcing following an emission of a unit
mass of a given substance, accumulated over a chosen time horizon,
relative to that of the reference substance, carbon dioxide (CO2). The
GWP thus represents the combined effect of the differing times these
substances remain in the atmosphere and their effectiveness in causing
radiative forcing. See also: Lifetime, Greenhouse gas emission metric.
Green infrastructure
See: Infrastructure.
Greenhouse gases (GHGs)
Gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and
anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths
within the spectrum of radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface, by the
atmosphere itself, and by clouds. This property causes the greenhouse
effect. Water vapour (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O),
methane (CH4) and ozone (O3) are the primary GHGs in the Earth’s
atmosphere. Human-made GHGs include sulphur hexafluoride
(SF6), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and
perfluorocarbons (PFCs); several of these are also O3-depleting
(and are regulated under the Montreal Protocol). See also: Well-mixed
greenhouse gas.
Grey infrastructure
See: Infrastructure.

Hazard
The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event
or trend that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts,
as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure, livelihoods,
service provision, ecosystems and environmental resources. See also:
Exposure, Vulnerability, Impacts, Risk.
Impacts
The consequences of realised risks on natural and human systems,
where risks result from the interactions of climate-related hazards
(including extreme weather/climate events), exposure, and vulnerability.
Impacts generally refer to effects on lives, livelihoods, health and well-
being, ecosystems and species, economic, social and cultural assets,
services (including ecosystem services), and infrastructure. Impacts may
be referred to as consequences or outcomes and can be adverse or
beneficial. See also: Adaptation, Hazard, Exposure, Vulnerability, Risk.
Inequality
See: Equality.
Indigenous knowledge (IK)
The understandings, skills and philosophies developed by societies with
long histories of interaction with their natural surroundings. For many
Indigenous Peoples, IK informs decision-making about fundamental
aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer term actions. This
knowledge is integral to cultural complexes, which also encompass
language, systems of classification, resource use practices, social
interactions, values, ritual and spirituality. These distinctive ways of
knowing are important facets of the world’s cultural diversity. See also:
Local knowledge (LK).
Indigenous Peoples
Indigenous Peoples and nations are those that, having a historical
continuity with pre-invasion and pre-colonial societies that developed
on their territories, consider themselves distinct from other sectors of the
societies now prevailing on those territories, or parts of them. They form
at present principally non-dominant sectors of society and are often
determined to preserve, develop, and transmit to future generations
their ancestral territories, and their ethnic identity, as the basis of their
continued existence as peoples, in accordance with their own cultural
patterns, social institutions, and common law system.
Infrastructure
The designed and built set of physical systems and corresponding
institutional arrangements that mediate between people, their
communities, and the broader environment to provide services that
support economic growth, health, quality of life, and safety.
Green infrastructure
The strategically planned interconnected set of natural and
constructed ecological systems, green spaces and other landscape
features that can provide functions and services including air
and water purification, temperature management, floodwater
management and coastal defence often with co-benefits for
people and biodiversity. Green infrastructure includes planted and
remnant native vegetation, soils, wetlands, parks and green open
spaces, as well as building and street level design interventions that
incorporate vegetation.
Grey infrastructure
Engineered physical components and networks of pipes, wires,
tracks and roads that underpin energy, transport, communications
(including digital), built form, water and sanitation, and solid-waste
management systems.
Irreversibility
A perturbed state of a dynamical system is defined as irreversible on a
given time scale if the recovery from this state due to natural processes
takes substantially longer than the time scale of interest. See also:
Tipping point.
Just transition
See: Transition.
Justice
Justice is concerned with ensuring that people get what is due to them,
setting out the moral or legal principles of fairness and equity in the
way people are treated, often based on the ethics and values of society.
Climate justice
Justice that links development and human rights to achieve a human-
centred approach to addressing climate change, safeguarding the
rights of the most vulnerable people and sharing the burdens and
benefits of climate change and its impacts equitably and fairly.
Social justice
Just or fair relations within society that seek to address the
distribution of wealth, access to resources, opportunity, and support
according to principles of justice and fairness.
Key risk
See: Risk.
Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF)
In the context of national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, LULUCF is a
GHG inventory sector that covers anthropogenic emissions and removals
of GHG in managed lands, excluding non-CO2 agricultural emissions.
Following the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories and
125
Annexes
Informal settlement
A term given to settlements or residential areas that by at least one
criterion fall outside official rules and regulations. Most informal
settlements have poor housing (with widespread use of temporary
materials) and are developed on land that is occupied illegally with
high levels of overcrowding. In most such settlements, provision for safe
water, sanitation, drainage, paved roads, and basic services is inadequate
or lacking. The term ‘slum’ is often used for informal settlements,
although it is misleading as many informal settlements develop into
good quality residential areas, especially where governments support
such development.
